And so he was easily aggravated. And so a student
says, Doc, Dr. Lindsay, should we drive our cars or
some detail? Doc said, that's a detail. Then
another one shows up his hand, and he says, ask him a
similar type question. I told you that's a detail.
And that went on, and then he just went, after a
while he just turned around and took off. And they
said, what happened? The students asked me, what
happened to him? But he was, I remember that real
clearly. Did any student ever try to play a joke or a
prank on you as a teacher? I don't know that they
did. No.
I think one time we may have left somebody in the
classroom asleep, you know, after class or
something like that. Did any student ever try to
bribe you for a grade or anything like that? No. No.
A lot of them coming around trying to get grades
raised. That's a common occurrence. I'll tell you
one of the things that you might enjoy was when we
first let girls in. Old Dick Davidson over there
was counseling one of them, and I happened to walk
by the door. An old girl was just sitting there just
boo-hooing. And Dr. Davidson looked over and
said, Here comes Dr. Holland. He'll help you. He
was ready to unload that girl. Did you ever have a
parent or any other outsider try to twist your arm
on anything? Yeah, I had one student, but he got
over it. He thought his little brother was sharper
than he was, and we hadn't placed him high enough or
something, giving him a, tough enough courses,
and it turned out he couldn't even handle what he
had. The
only problem I had a little, I had the only problem
with two or three profs, young ones that we hired.
We hired one guy from
He had gone to Switzerland.
What's the capital of that place? Bern. Bern,
Lucerne, Geneva, Lausanne. I've forgotten which
one it was right now. I don't think we've hit it.
Anyway, it's a well-known university. And every
one of them that we got out of there, they handled
their students just so rough that the students
couldn't get along with them. And the students
couldn't get along with this fellow. And so we had
to let him go. And
since then, he got an appointment over there. And
he makes a point to always send me a card. We had
another boy, young man, that we got. Came to us from
MIT, just as sharp as he could be. And you could
write a wonderful letter. But his, and when you
talk to him, you'd think, this guy is just going to
make an outstanding faculty member. I hired him.
Well, Toby said, you know, that's the first guy
that we've had that got into a squabble with
everybody in the entire department, including
all the mechanics downstairs, in less than one
month. And we had to finally... let him go, and I got
him a job with Bell Labs. I said, you people can
handle somebody like this. I can't handle him
because he's just too overbearing. He needs a job
where he put him over in a corner. Another one I'll
tell you is Bokris. I had the opportunity, the
first opportunity, to hire him. He came in over
there to get me to hire him, and I had this young
faculty that I had just hired. Most of them were 10
or 15 years younger than I was. And he came in there,
and he had a list of books that were longer than most
anybody's list of papers. I said, how in the world
do you do that? He said, well, I just kind of sketch
out a few things, and I get somebody else fill in
those little details. But I could just tell that
guy was so overbearing. And I decided that I didn't
care how good he was, that I had to think of the fact
that I had nine or 10 other faculty there. that I
wanted to develop. And if I had somebody like that,
he would just try to intimidate them and run all
over them. And so I declined hiring him. I didn't
care how good he was. You've got to look at this
thing. Are you big enough to hire somebody like
that? If you're real big, you can handle them. But
if you're no bigger than we were, you just can't
handle somebody that's, I don't care how good he
is. Well, old Martel hired him. And I saw Martel
later, and he said to me, he says, how in the world
did you pass up that man? I said, well, I decided we
couldn't work with him over there. So I'm not sure
what he says now. But anyway, I missed my
opportunity there. Let's see, one of the people I
forgot to ask about, and if we, this is a note to the
typist that moved this back up to where we were
talking about other administrators, Dick
Winerdi. Oh, he was really a good one. Dick... I
gave him a departmental position as professor
because he couldn't get anybody else to take him
on. He wanted to teach this little course in
activation analysis. So I made him a professor of
chemical engineering. And he was over in the
dean's office all the time. And so after he went
with Calhoun, I've forgotten. He jumped me about
something. I wrote some letter to him that just
really had a twist in it. And I sent a copy of it to
Fred. And he called me up and he said, boy, that just
tickled the life out of me. He said, but you know, I
don't understand Wayne Erdy. When he was working
for me, I just didn't have any problem with him, but
he's giving me a lot of problems now. And he said, I
can't understand that. And I said, well, what the
problem is now? He used to be working for you. He's
working for John Gavilan now. But the funny one was
that when he got two different occasions, when...
He was already out in the industry, and he called
me. You can tell what's coming. He says, Charlie,
being on the department staff of chemical
engineering was one of the highest honors that
I've ever had. I said, my boy wants to get into
graduate school. Could you help me?
Then another one was whenever he finally got
crosswise over there and he was looking for a home,
I thought we were going to get him back because he
was on my faculty. And so he was calling up wanting
to come back. That's right, when Dr. Miller became
president. He'd been crosswise with some of
those. See, Dick and I had offices that adjoined
each other, and the first three days that Dr.
Miller was president, he didn't even say good
morning to Dick. He literally did not say a word to
him. Dick came into my office and said to me
tersely, he said, I've got to find some work
somewhere. Well, he called me, and I told him,
well, you know, we'll try to use you. Come on over,
because I knew we were obligated to. Now, when he
was working for Dean Benson, what was his task?
When he was still in engineering, what was his
task? Oh, I think he had him doing, Fred put more
stock in what he told him than I would have. He kind
of had Fred buffaloed a little bit. Fred would kind
of fall for some of that. Was he to try to bring in
research money? Well, he was involved in a lot of
the, it was more in research than anything else.
But he got stuck on him and Newell both. And I could
tell Newell was no good the day that he came in when
he was looking for a job. And I made a couple
suggestions to him, and he just brushed them off.
And I could tell that he wasn't going to make it. But
Fred did. go along with him quite a while. He was
subject to being sucked in a little bit. Wayne Erdy
had that activation analysis. He didn't have it
down where he could, I've forgotten, Paul
Crawford used to laugh about. He was looking, he
had his system fixed so he could shove these
samples kind of like J.C. Penney's all over the
place. but he couldn't find silicon in
carborundum, which is made out of silicon.
He got in a cart for the horse. Back to... Joyous
pleasures of being the department head. What are
some other achievements that you remember during
those years that you're proud to look back on? You
said teaching was the biggest. Well, I've got a lot
of books published. I've got seven books
published, and I've got a lot of them in
distillation, kinetics, catalysis. In 93, I
wrote one on quantitative cancer modeling and
risk assessment with Silken, who's a
statistician. And so I enjoy very much the
development of ideas on paper. And see, when I
became department head, I realized that I didn't
have time to be down in that lab working all the
time. I just couldn't do it. And so what I did do was
get into this other field, and I got started with
Exxon down there in 1955 because I had, from a
master's degree, had worked with Phil Murdoch
on... on algebraic solution of very simple
distillation problems and there's just three or
four components and I got down there and OB
Franklin said well since you're an expert on
distillation we're going to let you work out this
uh... this big old tower uh... pipe still and it had
about thirty forty plates and probably five
hundred components and uh... streams going off
everywhere and actually In the way we were looking
at them, when you're doing finite differences,
every time you come to a terminal condition,
you've got another set of boundary conditions. So
they gave me that problem. And I just walked around
for about two weeks trying to figure out how in the
world, I can't even solve that little one. How in
the world can I solve anything like this? So I
finally found out a way to do it, and that's what got
me started on all this other stuff. And they
eventually were the first ones to develop a
program on it, which we call the theta method. And
it is still a real good method, and it has some
theoretical basis. And then I wrote a book on
kinetics, And it's still being used over there.
The one on kinetics is used, and also we're using
the one on distillation. So those two books are
still in use. What were your guidelines for being a
good department head?
Oh, I don't know. I just tried to treat everybody
fair. That was all. Just kind of treat them like
you'd like to be treated yourself. As near as you
can. And it's hard to do that, but to not have any,
uh, be favoritism over one or the other. Try to have
an open door to any of them that had any problem.
And, uh, and have some concern, it's very
difficult, but that's what I tried to do, and tried
to help them as much as I could with what helped them
advance their own careers. And you obviously had
some graduate students. Which are the graduate
students you're most proud to claim?
Let's see, there are several of them that have done
real well. Norman Tetlow was one of them who went to
Dow that developed the whole design package for
them. And Ron McDaniel was also with him down
there. And then Narker, I don't know, he was a
graduate student, worked over at the center some.
Another good one. I've had a lot of good graduate
students.
so and some of them very very good in fact I had two
Dan Taylor and Park Davis that both went to Rice and
I got them as graduate students and they also
worked with took some courses under Dr. Kleppel he
said that they were two of the best mathematical
minds that he had seen come through from
engineering that they just they could handle it,
and they were good students. With what other
institutions did you most closely cooperate? Oh,
I did some with the University of Texas, but not
anything in real detail, but Ben Winkle over there
was, he worked in distillation, but he did more of
the experimental work, and I was, I'd gotten off
into the other design, it's really design
methods, I'd gotten into that because That's all a
department head's got time to do. And also with
Bill Akers down at Rice, you may have known of him,
he was, he went to Tech and later went on and got his
degree at Rice and stayed down there with the
administration for a good long while. As the
enrollment at A&M began to change, women were
admitted, corps became volunteer and so forth,
did that, how did that affect the department? The
only thing that affected us was whenever the
enrollment got away, and we just were looking at
the possibility of having to run labs night and day
and all that kind of thing. That was the only thing,
and that kind of came to an end, and we didn't have
the space for it. But other than that, I'd say that
over the years that the students, I think they've
really gotten better. I've got a real excellent
class right now, I remember when I first started
teaching, there was a tendency for students to
think, well, by the time we get to be seniors, we've
already got the fundamental knowledge. All we're
gonna do from here on is think. solve problems but
they didn't have it all and then if you gave them
something new and said well we haven't had that you
know as if that weren't fair territory but the
students now just take it anything comes out of
them. Do you think that the courses that you and
your colleagues teach now are more demanding Oh,
yeah, they are. And they're higher quality.
Actually, I was disappointed when I got my degree
in chemical engineering because I'd had a pretty
good background in mathematics and science, and
they weren't using it. They were just using mainly
arithmetic. And they made it hard, but just giving
you catchy problems. That's why they kept the
grades down. But the material they really covered
wasn't really all that hard, the fundamentals.
Another thing we had was open book, which
encouraged you not to do anything, which is not
near as good as thinking that you're going to have
to go in there and have it all in your mind so that you
can spend your time working the problem instead of
thumbing through the book. And when you give open
book quizzes, what happens is that you give
something they can't find in there anyway. And so I
think it's better. After that, I never did give
open book quizzes. I just felt like that. You can,
students will do better if they have to, there's
certain tools that you're gonna have to learn
regardless, and just well learn them. It may be
drudgery, but there's certain, a carpenter's got
to have a hammer and a saw, and if you're gonna do any
good, you need certain fundamentals that you
understand thoroughly, and you don't have to be
looking them up. As women began to be in the
classroom, did y'all have any examples of where
somebody forgot that he was speaking now to a mixed
audience and said something? I don't know, but I
got one of these reports back once, and I could
never figure out what I had done that was sexy or
something. And that baffled me. I've never been
called on it but once, but I don't know what it was.
It must have been somebody gave a poor grade,
because I've never been called on it before. And I
never tell anything in class that's off color. The
only thing that I did tell,
I did show them a film that I had, some slides that I
had made. And that might have been, that's the only
thing I could figure. I was teaching a course on
quantitative cancer modeling and risk
assessment. And going back, and I was giving a
little bit on waste disposal. The first garbage
disposal place was right outside of Jerusalem.
It's the Greek name now that's for hell. It means
the same thing, it was a mess. And that was one of the
things I pointed out. But before I did that, I went
back and pointed out that probably hazardous
waste incineration or incineration began about
500,000 years ago. And what I had was I got somebody
to draw me this cartoon, and it showed these women
were lugging the wood, throwing it on the fire, and
the men were all sitting back watching them. And I
said, boy, in those days, men had it made. And
that's the only thing that I can figure out that I
might have said that I never did know what it was. In
general, I'll tell you, the girls, what will
happen is only the good ones will stay in. The poor
ones that see they can't make it, they're not like
the boys. The poor ones will drop out and go take
another major. You've got some boys that will stay
in there until the bitter end. And that's the
difference you see. Usually the girls are near the
top of the class. As far as you and your colleagues
knew, was chemical engineering one of the most
demanding majors on the campus? Well, I think
electrical was real demanding. I think chemical,
electrical, and mechanical was fairly
demanding. Those three were pretty demanding.
I'd say electrical may be. Electrical and
chemical were probably two of the most demanding,
and I don't know. I imagine it would depend on your
aptitude as to which you would think would be the
most demanding. That reminds me to go way back to
the early 60s again. As you and I and others were
part of that committee recommending the new name
for this institution, did you and your colleagues
in engineering have a preference for what the name
ought to be or ought not to be? You know, I haven't
thought about it since then.
No, I don't really. I don't know that at that time
that we would have gone with Texas A&M University,
though. As I understand from Vice President, then
Vice President Hall, he said that Mr. Rutter could
not at all accept losing the A&M. And that our
committee, you remember, recommended Texas
State University. Because everybody else was
going that way. And he said Mr. Rutter just didn't
like that at all. And Dr. Hall said he's the one that
came up with what it now is, the A&M with no periods
and so forth. And As I look back, okay, everybody
knows what school it is. It doesn't mean that
anymore. No, that's right. So I think it was a good
deal going there. That's what I'm saying, is it
doesn't hurt to be different. Right. When did we
begin to get large numbers of international
students in engineering?
Well, we started getting them way back there in the
60s some, and I would not, I was trying to, at one
time, we had some pressure on us to not have more
than 30% in engineering graduate students. And I
kept mine down. And I tried to keep them down. We
could have had a bigger class of graduate
students. And one of the things that we did to try to
attract others was take these that had finished
with a four-year degree in science from some of
these teaching colleges and get them in, give them
a fast course. But that's when it started. And now
there's just probably no holes barred. You can
have any number you want to. There was some concern
that the legislature would be concerned about us
educating so many foreign students. And that
prevailed a long time through engineering over
there. And we did keep ours down. What would be your
evaluation of the quality of the international
students, the academic ability? Oh, I think
they're good.
But another thing that I think is that they are
going to be the leaders unless we, I think that we
might want to give some favoritism to ours,
because what's happening to our own students now
is that they can get a good salary when they get the
BS degree, so they're going out and taking that
job. And I'm not so sure about what, there's
nothing wrong with being, showing favoritism
over your own national people that we shouldn't be
able to give ours enough stipend more to attract a
lot of good American students because they're the
ones, a lot of those are gonna end up as director of
your research, head of your chemical engineering
departments throughout the country. And so we
ought to be doing more to attract those people. and
uh that it is we all have them all on the same part and
generally that's correct if they're all citizens
but if they're not citizens we don't have to do that
and i think for our own good we need to we need to get
some that are some of our own in in line all right
i've now just anointed you as the advisor to
chemical engineering, planning the future, and
then to engineering. What advice would you give to
your department and to your college colleagues as
they look to the future? Well, we did a big study,
and I had all industry helping me on this. And one of
the things that we came up with was what they needed
to start looking at was to make sure that these
students have a better, rounded education.
Chemistry are only taking about 10 hours. Above
the bachelor for the PhD, the classroom is one of
the best places to pick up and to learn another
discipline. And what we need is people that are
broadly trained, and they can even have some
business. And this is not giving up the English and
this sort of stuff. I had a guy that taught me
British prose and anthology. And he at one time
taught mathematics, and he said, I told Dr. Moore,
who was president at that time, that I could not
teach mathematics anymore because I started
reading that poem. And the Assyrians swept down.
He said, that just took me. But I think they should
be... The classic, the well-educated man today
really should be one that has some experience in
the mathematics and the sciences and English. And
I think that's college-wide. But also, he should
have some... some in the arts and sciences so that
he knows where everything came from, the history
of all of it. And what I think we need to do is get back
to having chemical engineering students take
their math in the math department and get them
interested in teaching some courses that are not
all just theoretical mathematics but some
applied mathematics for the engineers, the
chemists, and all these other people. You should
be taking courses and we should have some students
taking some courses in physics and mathematics
and
And we don't do that because what is going to
happen, and even business, because what's going
to happen is that things are changing so fast that
you don't have time for somebody to come up on the
curve anymore. You've got to have people well
enough, broad enough trained that we can go from
one project to another and he still doesn't have
such a long learning curve. And I think that this
was their feeling, that we've been going in the
wrong direction. And right now the legislature is
still trying to make you take fewer hours and
everything. The best place to learn something is
in the classroom. It's the most efficient way. And
that's what I would say is let's turn out some
really well-educated, well-rounded that have
had some courses in all these other departments.
So that, and it's not just in engineering, it's all
in the arts and sciences. And I enjoyed, look back
over it, I enjoyed some of those courses that I had
outside the department far more than I did some of
them I had inside. The one I had in British
prosanthology, I wouldn't take anything for that
course.
And it depends on the teachers. You've got to have
real good teachers dedicated to teach those
courses. And so that's what I would, that's what
it's going to take because what they've come up
with the concept is that we are now in the age of a
learning society. And the B1 and most nations are
going to adopt this concept because they found out
that's the only way that they can keep the
competitive edge on their competitors or stay
ahead of them is by learning technology faster
than they do. And to learn it faster, you've got to
have a broad background so you can switch from one
technology to another and pick it up. And so I would
say that that would be, they'd all be well served to
start looking at teaching more courses and over a
broader scope. But now none of these students take
courses outside. I mentioned already to you how
many I took outside the department. Then I went
over after I got my PhD and took all the courses that
they offered in the math department on top of it. So
this is the direction we ought to go in so that they
can switch fields. See, I wrote this book on
quantitative cancer model and risk assessment
statistics. And I never had a course in it, but I had
enough mathematics that I could work with silken
and try to figure it out, but I wrote it so that
engineers could read it. In terms of the
department's leadership, should it be a
department head or a department chairman?
Oh, I think a department head, I think you need more
of a line organization. And I'm not sure that the
terms ought to be so limited because if you get to
putting so much emphasis on just being a professor
and doing research, the guy says, hell, I'll take
it for four years and I'm not going to bust my butt
because it's not going to have anything to do with
where I'm going. I'll take it and get mine done and
then somebody else can have it. I think that's a
tendency in chairmanships. And I was using the
term chairman also to mean that the chairman is
bound by the majority vote. Yeah. I don't think
that's a good way to run it. I usually would try to,
every once in a while you're not going to Well,
first of all, you should be convincing people that
this is the direction to go in, that you don't even
really have to vote. You can just look and see what
the consensus is and decide what to do. And so, no, I
think it still has to be a leadership position. And
when you get these others, you don't really have
the leadership in there that you need. People
don't really feel responsible for it. And I found
this out running the laboratories. I had to get
somebody permanently in charge of them because if
you didn't, they just went downhill. One guy would
come in, and he'd be in charge of it, and he wouldn't
fix anything because I'm just going to have it this
semester. Somebody else got it after that. Who
were the key people in your departmental office
and other staff folks that deserve a pat on the back
for their fine work? Well, actually, Wanda Greer
was the one that stayed with me the longest and
probably helped me the most. I used to run through
them about one a year until I got a hold of her. Now,
that's the wife of? John. She's from Port Arthur,
where you are, and knows you. She did a real good job
because she had good judgment. Mm-hmm. And also
was good at reading anything I wrote and telling me
what was wrong. And she worked with me long enough
that she didn't mind telling me when she thought I
was wrong and did. And so that's worth a lot to get
somebody that knows the ropes and will just take it
and run with it. All right.